---
title: New Flaming Lips album
author: bluegray
layout: post
permalink: /2006/internet/new-flaming-lips-album/33/
categories:
  - internet
  - music
---
# 

The Flaming Lips album *At War With the Mystics* will be released on the 4 of April.  
Can't say I like their more recent stuff as much as the old albums, but they always come up with something worth listening to.  
Yeah! :D

Anyway, it leaked already, so... remember, if you like it, buy it ;)

Wayne Coyne provides some insight into each track:

# SONG NOTES FROM *THE SORCERER'S ORPHAN*  
Understanding *At War With The Mystics*

### THE YEAH YEAH YEAH SONG (WITH ALL YOUR POWER)  
Steven had been recording in a separate vocal booth on his computer and  
I walked by and heard the crazy grouped vocals doing the "yeah yeah  
yeah" part and I was immediately hooked. This is one of those songs that  
points the finger at the pettiness of those in power but also points the  
finger back at ourselves - what would YOU do? Power in the hands of the  
inexperienced (which is what we would be) is very dangerous...

### FREE RADICALS (A HALLUCINATION OF THE CHRISTMAS SKELETON PLEADING WITH A SUICIDE BOMBER)

I had a dream in which Devendra Banhart (the weird singer/songwriter) is  
pleading with a suicide bomber (who is about to go blow up something or  
somebody) to change his mind. And once he changes the deranged zealot's  
point of view, he (Devendra) immediately sympathizes with the  
frustration (mostly aimed at George W. Bush) that could make someone  
long for such exaggerated revenge...(Keep in mind that this is just a  
funny dream - these suicide bombers are clearly brainwashed religious  
fanaticals that are insane with their own agenda...they are beyond any  
pleads of reason and are not worthy of any sympathy.)

### THE SOUND OF FAILURE

We have some friends whose father was dying of cancer - I say "was"  
because it (the cancer and his death) dragged on agonizingly for over a  
year - and they (our friends) were becoming, understandably, weary of  
being forced to be upbeat...

And I remember hearing a comment once about how annoying it was, to  
them, to have to hear this gratingly jubilant fake enthusiasm (usually  
hokey hyped-up pop groups like Black Eyed Peas, Destiny's Child, Ashlee  
Simpson, Hillary Duff, etc.) blasting out of the "Muzak" systems  
virtually everywhere they went. To them this cheerleader-type assault  
was really only effective if you didn't actually have any real psychic  
stress...And they felt that it was, surprisingly, helpful to them to try  
to understand their fears and their sadness - as opposed to pretending  
that it's "all good."

And, you see, this is true insight... finally we know it's okay to have  
a troubled mind, it's okay to fail...

And so this song (which was written in the car on the way up to New York  
from Oklahoma while I drove and Steven played battery powered keyboard  
and computer) is about a young girl whose best friend has died, and  
everywhere she goes (like the friends I mentioned earlier) she must  
endure the empty optimism of the inexperienced. She wants to know, since  
it has arrived, what is despair, what is hope, what is failure...And  
what is in the darkness??

The line in the song, "so go tell Britney and go tell Gwen" is obviously  
a reference back to my friends and their Muzak incident...meaning,  
"Yeah, go tell Britney Spears and Gwen Stefani that their energy and  
their Prom Queen smiles only go to prove that they don't empathize with  
my sadness." I believe, in the song, that Britney and Gwen could be  
thought of as this grieving girl's less mature friends...and that she's  
not trying to go against them, she just doesn't want to pretend that she  
understands what she doesn't really understand - what death is...what  
despair is...what existential fear is... She doesn't know, but she's  
starting to find out...

### IT'S DARK... IS IT ALWAYS THIS DARK?

A strange sort of afterword to the previous song. The voice and the  
strange blippy trail is actually my voice run through a computer plug-in  
effect called "Squirrel Parade"...Pretty cool... Anyway, it sounds like  
I'm saying "It's Dark", but I didn't say "It's Dark". I don't remember  
what it was exactly - just me talking before a song, but it gives the  
illusion of a young girl finding her way through a mystery...yes?

### MY COSMIC AUTUMN REBELLION (THE INNER LIFE AS BLAZING SHIELD OF DEFIANCE AND OPTIMISM AS CELESTIAL SPEAR OF ACTION)

We had been using the musical elements of this song (it wasn't a song  
then) as an intro for our live shows, as I rolled around on top of the  
crowd in the now famous "Space Bubble." The power of the chord structure  
and arrangement kept inspiring me and I eventually pieced together this  
manifesto of defiance and optimism. It is my response to the naysaying  
know-it-alls who see life leading only to death and see nature as a  
cruel prankster designed to defeat the human spirit. And the truth  
(which I get to proclaim as if standing on the top of a holy mountain  
shooting lazer beams out of my hands - thanks to Steven's epic  
orchestration) is that no circumstance can ever defeat us unless we let  
it...

Resilience in the face of failure is a manifestation of the mind...

### VEIN OF STARS

I picked up a guitar that Steven had tuned to an odd open chord (F 6/9)  
and, without thinking, strummed it a couple of times and immediately  
sang (off the top of my head) the first line into the tape recorder,  
"Who knows, maybe there isn't a vein of stars calling out my name." My  
intention was to sing something cosmic about how humans have (as science  
reveals more and more about the nature of time and space) been abandoned  
by the stars...But I believe, once we finished it (the song and its  
production), it seemed to convey just the opposite...That almost despite  
science we are connected to the stars...Because we love to look at them,  
we hope maybe they love to look at us...

### THE WIZARD TURNS ON...THE GIANT SILVER FLASHLIGHT AND PUTS ON HIS WEREWOLF MOCCASINS

A kind of space jam where the initial performance had Michael playing  
the CD player (in it was a CD with a recording of the drums), Steven  
playing the Rhodes and me playing electric bass. Mr. Fridmann ran the  
whole thing through a series of space echoes. flangers, filters and  
distortion boxes... The entire mix lays in the bed of a program called  
Metaphysical Function...Neat, huh?

### IT OVERTAKES ME

I sometimes will do a silly songwriter's trick - I'll act like I'm  
writing a song for someone else and on this track I was imagining Gwen  
Stefani... I pictured her singing it and imagined what kind of  
production would happen. Initially I called the song, when it was  
intended for Ms. Stefani, "I Like To Masturbate and Think Of Outer  
Space"...and I still think that if she was doing the song it's a great  
title....But to think of me, a 45 year old man with a graying beard,  
umm, masturbating....is... well...(I'm uncomfortable even typing  
this)...unpleasant...so anyway...The song ends up being more about my  
occasional bouts of panic when accidentally contemplating the "Cosmic  
Reality", that is....that we (the Earth) are floating perilously adrift  
in a vast and endless sea of black infinity (outer space) and it is,  
when analyzed, a mindfuck...and yes I feel horribly insignificant....So  
anyway, what we ended up with, I believe, still sounds like a mashing of  
"Hollaback Girl" and "1969" by The Stooges...take some drugs and turn it  
up real loud...

### THE STARS ARE SO BIG AND I AM SO SMALL...DO I STAND A CHANCE?

This section of the song captures, I think, the vulnerability and awe of  
this same scenario (the Cosmic Reality) within a cathedralesque  
womb-cloud of angelic voices... but instead of panic it is solemn and  
comforting...

### MR. AMBULANCE DRIVER

The entire song, its key and chord structure, is built around the  
ambulance siren sample. When we first did it there was an eerie death  
coloring (probably due to the siren and the lyric about the girl being  
dead) that was very satisfying... But we found, with repeated listening,  
that the siren, somehow, subliminally disappeared and, to our surprise,  
it revealed a kind of Eddie Rabbitt (70's pop-country singer-songwriter)  
at the roller rink, easy listening teenager car crash ballad.

### HAVEN'T GOT A CLUE

A friend of ours, Greg Kurstin (he played with us on the Beck tour and  
was nicknamed "Firefingers" by Steven due to his sublime playing of the  
keyboard) is an accomplished musician and has a great ear for pop sounds  
and structure...He's written songs with artists ranging from Enrique  
Iglesias to Karen O and he, upon my insistence, sent this unfinished  
track for us to build on. It was great fun and again (like the Gwen  
Stefani trick) it allowed us to create inside a different identity. The  
song is about a type of person that everybody knows and endures (we  
won't mention names). They blame everyone but themselves for all of  
their problems which they seem to have in endless supply. If they  
suffer, you suffer more... You know what I'm talking about.

### THE W.A.N.D. (THE WILL ALWAYS NEGATES DEFEAT)

I was playing electric guitar, Michael was on fuzzwah bass and Steven  
was on the drumkit and we stumbled upon this druggy prog-rock riff and  
stuttery, funky beat. It was like Black Sabbath getting mashed up with  
Sly and the Family Stone or Stevie Wonder, and it sent us off in a  
wonderful new direction. The idea of a magic wand and magic powers  
occurred to me while watching a homeless guy in Oklahoma City. He was, I  
believe, Vietnamese, and had a cool looking wizardly beard and mustache  
and he carried a long stick, which he used as a kind of cane-weapon. And  
one day I saw him fighting an "imagined" enemy and the long stick became  
(as best I could tell) a kind of magic wand that made his invisible foe  
retreat. I mean... it seemed to give him a confidence that allowed him  
to defeat his hallucinations...and at first I thought "how sad...he  
believes this old stick is saving him"... but the more I thought about  
it, the more I envied him in a way...for the evil manifestations of his  
mind he invented a sparkling sorcerer's baton to lead his psychic  
revolution...yes!!...

And so we delved into a kind of radical protest rock mentality...We  
sing, "We got the power now, motherfuckers, that's where it belongs",  
but I believe it's cosmically empowering - not actually empowering. In  
the song, we rail against the greedy, corrupt evil beings who are in  
control and trying to enslave us... But our rebellion is simply to fight  
back - we have no solutions.

### POMPEII AM GÃ–TTERDÃ„MMERUNG

A galloping Godhead melody (reminiscent of the German National Anthem)  
telling a vague story of a young couple planning their suicide. They  
live in a place where there are volcanoes erupting and they are going to  
take the train up the mountain and jump into the flowing lava as a  
symbolic sacrifice of their restricted love.The triumphant quality of  
the arrangement suggests that, just before they obliterate themselves,  
they realize that to make such a decision, to destroy yourself, is  
really just a point of internal motivation leading to outward action.  
And, if they could do something as extreme as annihilating themselves,  
why couldn't they just try to change the circumstances that have limited  
them?....Action is all we have....Worth mentioning is that this is  
Steven's first lead vocal on a Flaming Lips track...

### GOIN' ON

The core of the chorus melody has a melancholy resolution evoking,  
abstractly, sections of Mahler's 9th Symphony...We are, subconsciously I  
guess, drawn to "the answer"... maybe that is why people have the urge  
to pray or sing or create...We long for this thing called "closure", but  
I believe that "closure" is, maybe, an illusion. This song takes a long  
stare at coping and the secret healing powers of slipping through time  
and space...How suffering, somehow, is relieved by  
simple...acceptance...

Wayne  
2006